---
layout: post
title:  Single cell interpretation using correlation explanation
date:   2023-07-15 16:40:16
description: scRNA-seq data analysis
tags: formatting links
categories: sample-posts
---
Background: Gene expression analysis provides invaluable insights into the regulation and activity of genes in diverse cell types, tissues, and organisms. Upon exposure to internal or external signals, genes can be precisely coordinated to induce transcriptional co-regulation. These co-regulated gene sets give rise to distinct biological phenotypes or functions, commonly called gene expression programs (GEPs). 
The emergence of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology has revolutionized our understanding of gene expression and its profound influence on biological processes. Existing methods of scRNA-seq data analysis predominantly focus on clustering cells and identifying their phenotypes. However, a cell’s gene expression can shape not only its phenotype (identity GEPs) but also its temporal state or response to different stimuli (activity GEPs). 
Methods: To improve scRNA-seq data interpretation, we propose a machine-learning-based method, linear CorEx that decomposes the data into a small number of factors, that capture the underlying structure of the data. The independence of such factors is enforced by optimizing a statistical objective function that measures the quality of the factorization.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/Fig1_yellowBack.png" title="CorEx workflow" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Result: In this study, we demonstrate that biologically meaningful GEPs can be inferred directly from scRNA-seq data by grouping genes based on the total correlation optimization function. We used synthetic and real-world datasets to examine our method’s capability of capturing cell types, developmental age, and activity programs in scRNA-seq data. Thus, linear CorEx was able to identify cell types, developmental ages, and cell cycle activity in mouse dentate gyrus data. Further, we showed the ability of inferred GEPs to be used in transfer learning for in-silico validation of data interpretation as well as for finding the same GEPs across species and different sequencing technologies. As a result, similar GEPs were found in another mouse dentate gyrus dataset and single-nucleous-RNA-seq data of human dentate gyrus. 
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that the linear CorEx is a powerful tool for extracting biologically meaningful programs from scRNA-seq data. Its ability to be used in transfer learning will be beneficial for interpreting data from model animals. Overall, linear CorEx enhances our understanding of gene expression programs and opens up new possibilities for studying complex biological processes.
